---
sidebar_position: 40
title: Project structure
description: The folder layout of a squid project
---

# Squid project structure

All files and folders except `package.json` are optional.

- `package.json` -- Configuration file for dependencies and the build script (invoked with `npm run build`). Hard requirement for deploying to [SQD Cloud](/cloud).
- `package-lock.json` OR `yarn.lock` OR `pnpm-lock.yaml` -- Dependencies shrinkwrap. Required for [Cloud](/cloud) deployment, except those that [override the dependencies installation command](/cloud/reference/manifest/#cmd).
- `tsconfig.json` -- Configuration of `tsc`. Required for most squids.
- [Deployment manifest](/cloud/reference/manifest) (`squid.yaml` by default) -- Definitions of squid services used for running it locally with [`sqd run`](/squid-cli/run) and deploying to [SQD Cloud](/cloud).
- `.squidignore` -- Files and patterns to be excluded when sending the squid code to the [Cloud](/cloud). When not supplied, some files will still be omitted: see the [reference page](/cloud/reference/squidignore) for details.
- `schema.graphql` -- [The schema definition file](/sdk/reference/schema-file). Required if your squid [stores its data in PostgreSQL](/sdk/resources/persisting-data/typeorm).
- `/src` -- The TypeScript source code folder for the squid processor.
   + `/src/main.ts` -- The entry point of the squid processor process. Typically, contains a `processor.run()` call.
   + `/src/processor.ts` -- Processor object ([EVM](/sdk/reference/processors/evm-batch) or [Substrate](/sdk/reference/processors/substrate-batch)) definition and configuration.
   + `/src/model/generated` -- The folder for the TypeORM entities generated from `schema.graphql`.
   + `/src/model` -- The module exporting the entity classes.
   + `/src/server-extension/resolvers` -- A folder for [user-defined GraphQL resolvers](/sdk/reference/openreader-server/configuration/custom-resolvers) used by [OpenReader](/sdk/reference/openreader-server).
   + `/src/types` -- A folder for types generated by the Substrate [typegen](/sdk/resources/tools/typegen/) tool for use in data decoding.
   + `/src/abi` -- A folder for modules generated by the EVM [typegen](/sdk/resources/tools/typegen/) tool containing type definitions and data decoding boilerplate code.
- `/db` -- The designated folder with the [database migrations](/sdk/resources/persisting-data/typeorm).
- `/lib` -- The output folder for the compiled squid code.
- `/assets` -- A designated folder for custom user-provided files (e.g. static data files to seed the squid processor with).
- `/abi` -- A designated folder for JSON ABI files used as input by the EVM [typegen](/sdk/resources/tools/typegen/).
- `docker-compose.yml` -- A Docker compose file for local runs. Has a Postgres service definition by default.
- `.env` -- Defines environment variables used by `docker-compose.yml` and when the squid is run locally.
- `typegen.json` -- The config file for the Substrate [typegen](/sdk/resources/tools/typegen/) tool.
- `commands.json` -- [User-defined scripts](/squid-cli/commands-json) picked up by [Squid CLI](/squid-cli/commands-json). See also the [CLI cheatsheet](/sdk/how-to-start/cli-cheatsheet/).
