---
sidebar_position: 10
title: EVM indexer from an ABI
description: Autogenerated squid for events and txs
---

# Quickstart: generate from ABI

With the `abi` template you can generate ready-to-use squids from EVM contract [ABIs](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.19/abi-spec.html). Here we make a simple squid that decodes and indexes EVM logs and transactions of a single contract into a local Postgres database. Additionally, it serves the indexed data with a rich GraphQL API supporting pagination and filtering.

It is also possible to generate squids that handle data from multiple contracts and/or save the output to a file-based dataset.

:::info
Squid generation tools are fully documented on [this page](/basics/squid-gen).
:::

## Pre-requisites

Before getting to work on your very first squid, verify that you have installed the following software: 

- Node v16.x or newer
- [Squid CLI](/squid-cli/installation) v2.1.0 or newer
- Docker

:::info
With the exception of `sqd init`, `sqd` commands mentioned here are just scripts defined in `commands.json` that the `sqd` executable automatically discovers. Take a look at the contents of this file to learn more about how squids work under the hood.
:::

Please note:
- Squid templates are **not** compatible with `yarn`. Use `npm` instead.

## Step 1: Scaffold from a template 

Come up with a new memorable name for your squid and scaffold from [squid-abi-template](https://github.com/subsquid/squid-abi-template) using [`sqd init`](/squid-cli/init):

```bash
sqd init my-awesome-squid --template abi
cd my-awesome-squid
# install the dependencies
npm ci
```

##  Step 2: Generate the squid

- Consult the [supported EVM networks page](/evm-indexing/supported-networks) and find an archive endpoint for your network in the list.
- Prepare the contract ABI and save it into the `abi` folder, e.g. as `abi/usdc.json`.

:::info
For public contracts the ABI can be fetched automatically using an Etherscan-like API. To do so omit the `--abi` flag or, if your contract is a proxy, supply its address via `--proxy` and the address of the implentation via `--address`. For a full list of supported CLI options see
```sh
sqd generate --help
```
:::

Generate the squid with
```bash
sqd generate \
--address <address> \
--abi <path to contract ABI> \ # optional
--archive <network archive alias or endpoint URL> \
--event '*' \
--function '*' \
--from <starting block>
```
The tool will attempt to grab the ABI from Etherscan API if `--abi` is omitted. Other compatible APIs can be used; for example, BSC contracts' ABIs can be retreved from BscScan with `--etherscan-api https://api.bscscan.com/`.

### Example

```bash
sqd generate \
--address 0x6B175474E89094C44Da98b954EedeAC495271d0F \
--archive eth-mainnet \
--event '*' \
--function '*' \
--from 1000000
```

:::info
Squid generation tools can also be [configured with YAML files](/basics/squid-gen/). This mode unlocks advanced features such as working with multiple contracts and saving the squid data to file-based datasets.
:::

## Step 3: Launch Postgres in a detached Docker container

```bash
sqd up
```

## Step 4: Generate the schema migrations

```bash
sqd migration:generate
```

## Step 5: Run the squid processor

Run the processor with
```bash
sqd process
```

The squid now ingests the contract transactions and event log data, decodes it and stores it in the database.

## Step 6: Start the GraphQL server

In a separate terminal window, run

```bash
sqd serve
```

This starts a GraphQL server serving the indexed events and transactions from the local database. The GraphQL playground is available at [`http://localhost:4350/graphql`](http://localhost:4350/graphql). Open it in a browser and run sample queries by applying filters and data selections in the panel to the left.

```graphql
query MyQuery {
  contractEventTransfers(limit: 10) {
    id
    src
    dst
  }
}
```

## What's next?

- [Deploy the squid to the Aquarium hosted service](/deploy-squid)
- [Migrate your existing subgraphs to Subsquid](/migrate/migrate-subgraph)
- [Explore examples of squids for EVM networks, from simple transfer indexing to DEX analytics](/examples/evm)
- [Develop a custom EVM squid from scratch](/quickstart/quickstart-ethereum)
- [Define your own data schema](/store/postgres/schema-file)
- [Deeper dive into `EvmBatchProcessor`](/evm-indexing)
- [Explore how to enhance the GraphQL API with custom SQL, caching and limits](/graphql-api)
