---
sidebar_position: 3
description: >-
  Subsquid SDK's latest release, code-named: 🔥🦑 brings a lot of new features
  and powerful improvements.
---

# Migrate to FireSquid

## Overview

This guide goes through the necessary steps to migrate v5 squids to FireSquid and provide a summary of the new features.
For the sake of simplicity, this guide is built upon `SubstrateProcessor` as it has the same execution model as the previous versions. Once the guide is complete, we recommend refactoring the squid to a much more performant [`SubstrateBatchProcessor`](/develop-a-squid/squid-processor) as the next step.

## 1 Package version updates for FireSquid

The FireSquid release requires version bumps for most of the Subsquid packages. Consult [squid-template](https://github.com/subsquid/squid-template/blob/main/package.json) for a reference setup. 
 

The following versions should be updated to latest:

```bash
npm i @subsquid/cli@latest \
@subsquid/substrate-processor@latest \
@subsquid/typeorm-store@latest \
@subsquid/substrate-typegen@latest \
@subsquid/substrate-metadata-explorer@latest \
@subsquid/typeorm-migration@latest \
@subsquid/typeorm-codegen@latest 
```

The following new packages will be installed:
- `@subsquid/typeorm-migration:0.1.x`. Separate package to replace `sqd db` commands with `squid-typeorm-migration`
- `@subsquid/typeorm-codegen:0.0.x`. Separate package to replace `sqd codegen`  with `squid-typeorm-codegen`
- `@subsquid/typeorm-store:0.1.x`. Separate package for the TypeORM implementation of the processor store

**CLI commands updates**

- Use `npx squid-typeorm-migration` instead of `npx sqd db`
- Use `npx squid-typeorm-codegen` instead of `npx sqd codegen`
- The command `npx sqd squid tail` is deprecated. Use `npx sqd squid logs`

## 2 Pluggable `ctx.store`  

The store interface provided by the mapping context is now configured by the `SubstrateProcessor` constructor argument. The type of `ctx.store` is inferred from it.

The new package `@subsquid/typeorm-store` provides two implementations of the `Database` interface accepted by `SubstrateProcessor`.
 
**FullTypeormDatabase**

`FullTypeormDatabase` works exactly as in `v5` providing a plain [EntityManager](https://orkhan.gitbook.io/typeorm/docs/entity-manager-api) as a store, albeit without `.get()` method
 
Usage:
```ts
import { FullTypeormDatabase } from '@subsquid/typeorm-store'
import { EntityManager } from 'typeorm'

// in a handler:
processor.addEventHandler('Some.Event', ctx => {  
  ctx.store.save(new FooEntity({ id: 1}))
})
```

In the snippet above, `ctx.store` passed to the handlers will be of type `EntityManager`.
 
**TypeormDatabase**

`TypeormDatabase` (recommended) provides `ctx.store`, which is

- Lazy (no transaction is opened if no data is read or written to the store). This is useful e.g. when one want to subscribe for some frequent events but only interested in the cases when the events were emitted under specific conditions (e.g. by a specific contract)
- Looks like a stripped down version of `EntityManager` (no `.query()`, no cascading saves)
- Much faster for data updates
- The schema name and the transaction isolation level can be passed as an optional constructor argument

The performance improvements come from the fact that `Store` implements `.save()` via upsert and all the data manipulation methods are translated into a single SQL statement (compared to multiple SQL statements generated by `EntityManager`)
 
Usage:
 
```ts
import { Store, TypeormDatabase } from '@subsquid/typeorm-store'

// in a handler:
processor.addEventHandler('Some.Event', ctx => {  
  ctx.store.save(new FooEntity({ id: 1}))
})
```

In the snippet above, `ctx.store` passed to the handlers will be of type `Store`.


## 3 Change the processor initialization 
 
**Initialize the processor**

For `SubstrateProcessor` one __MUST__ specify a `Database` implementation (i.e. choose one of the above) and change `dataSource` to a FireSquid archive with a new version of `lookupArchive`. The config statements can now be chained. Other processor's parameters haven't changed.

``` ts
const processor = new SubstrateProcessor(new TypeormDatabase())
    .setBatchSize(500)
    .setDataSource({
        // Lookup archive by the network name in the Subsquid registry
        archive: lookupArchive("kusama", { release: "FireSquid" })

        // Use archive created by archive/docker-compose.yml
        // archive: 'http://localhost:8888/graphql'
    })

```

**Rename the handlers** 

All the pallets' names now start from uppercase and must follow the same naming convention as defined by the substrate runtime. As a rule of thumb, pallet and event names are upper-cased, while call names are lowercase. Instead of `ExtrinsicHandler` one now should use `CallHandler` which is triggered even if the call was wrapped in a `sudo`, `proxy` or a `batch.util` extrinsic:

```ts
processor.addEventHandler('Balances.Transfer', ... 
processor.addCallHandler('Balances.transfer_keep_alive', ...
```
  
**Change the handlers context**

One __SHOULD__ specify a data projection for the handler context. Only the selected data field will be fetched from the Archive. If it is skipped, the context will contain the default set of data fields.
  
One can see all the supported projection options [here](/develop-a-squid/squid-processor/configuration#log-items-subscription) and rely on auto-complete assist from an IDE.

Further, one __MUST__ explicitly specify a `Store` interface for handlers defined as explicit external functions. Arrow-function handlers will infer it automatically.

*Example: an arrow-function handler*
 
```ts
processor.addEventHandler('Balances.Transfer', {
  // he we specify which data will be fetched and passed
  // to the handler context
    data: {
        event: {args: true}
    }
  }, async ctx => {
    // Handler's business logic, only ctx.event.args is available
    // The type of ctx is inferred
})
```

*Example: an explicitly defined handler*
 
```ts
processor.addEventHandler('Balances.Transfer', handleTransferEvent)
// An explicit typing for the handler context
async function handleTransferEvent(ctx: EventHandlerContext<Store, {event: {args: true}}>){
    // Handler's business logic, only ctx.event.args is available
}
```

 
## Typegen

The `chainVersions` config field has been renamed to `specVersions`. It now accepts either 
 - an [Archive](/archives/) endpoint
 - a `jsonl` file generated by [`squid-substrate-metadata-explorer(1)`](https://github.com/subsquid/squid/tree/master/substrate-metadata-explorer)


With an archive:

```json title="typegen.json"
{
  "outDir": "src/types",
  "specVersions": "https://kusama.archive.subsquid.io/graphql",
  "events": [
    "Balances.Transfer",
    "Balances.Deposit"
  ],
  "calls": [],
  "storage": []
}
```

With `squid-substrate-metadata-explorer`, first generate the metadata versions file:

```bash
npx squid-substrate-metadata-explorer \
  --chain wss://kusama-rpc.polkadot.io \
  --out kusamaVersions.jsonl
```

and then provide in the typegen config

```json title="typegen.json"
{
  "outDir": "src/types",
  "specVersions": "kusamaVersions.jsonl",
  "events": [
    "Balances.Transfer",
    "Balances.Deposit"
  ],
  "calls": [],
  "storage": []
}
```

Once the config is ready, (re)generate the typings for the requested events, calls and storage items:
```bash
make typegen
```

### What's next?

Get familiar with [`SubstrateBatchProcessor`](/develop-a-squid/squid-processor) and refactor the squid to get up to a 100x speed up of the squid synchronization time. 